---
title: Ending Year 2020!
author: Anuradha Wickramarachchi
date: 2020-12-31 10:00:00 +1000
categories: []
tags: [News, Publications]
math: true
mermaid: true
---

The year 2020 has been challenging, different and best of all *over*. In this short blog I would like to share few updates in terms of my research work.

<hr/>
***Both Vijini and I were able to publish our first research articles of the PhD!***
<hr/>

### MetaBCC-LR
This piece of work was presented at *ISMB 2020*
DOI: [10.1093/bioinformatics/btaa441](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btaa441){:target="_blank"}

**Abstract**

**Motivation**

Metagenomics studies have provided key insights into the composition and structure of microbial communities found in different environments. Among the techniques used to analyse metagenomic data, binning is considered a crucial step to characterize the different species of micro-organisms present. The use of short-read data in most binning tools poses several limitations, such as insufficient species-specific signal, and the emergence of long-read sequencing technologies offers us opportunities to surmount them. However, most current metagenomic binning tools have been developed for short reads. The few tools that can process long reads either do not scale with increasing input size or require a database with reference genomes that are often unknown. In this article, we present MetaBCC-LR, a scalable reference-free binning method which clusters long reads directly based on their k-mer coverage histograms and oligonucleotide composition.

**Results**

We evaluate MetaBCC-LR on multiple simulated and real metagenomic long-read datasets with varying coverages and error rates. Our experiments demonstrate that MetaBCC-LR substantially outperforms state-of-the-art reference-free binning tools, achieving ∼13% improvement in F1-score and ∼30% improvement in ARI compared to the best previous tools. Moreover, we show that using MetaBCC-LR before long-read assembly helps to enhance the assembly quality while significantly reducing the assembly cost in terms of time and memory usage. The efficiency and accuracy of MetaBCC-LR pave the way for more effective long-read-based metagenomics analyses to support a wide range of applications.
Availability and implementation

> The source code is freely available at: [https://github.com/anuradhawick/MetaBCC-LR](https://github.com/anuradhawick/MetaBCC-LR){:target="_blank"}.

<hr/>

### GraphBin
Published work in *Bioinformatics*
DOI: [10.1093/bioinformatics/btaa180](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btaa180){:target="_blank"}

**Abstract**

**Motivation**

The field of metagenomics has provided valuable insights into the structure, diversity and ecology within microbial communities. One key step in metagenomics analysis is to assemble reads into longer contigs which are then binned into groups of contigs that belong to different species present in the metagenomic sample. Binning of contigs plays an important role in metagenomics and most available binning algorithms bin contigs using genomic features such as oligonucleotide/k-mer composition and contig coverage. As metagenomic contigs are derived from the assembly process, they are output from the underlying assembly graph which contains valuable connectivity information between contigs that can be used for binning.

**Results**

We propose GraphBin, a new binning method that makes use of the assembly graph and applies a label propagation algorithm to refine the binning result of existing tools. We show that GraphBin can make use of the assembly graphs constructed from both the de Bruijn graph and the overlap-layout-consensus approach. Moreover, we demonstrate improved experimental results from GraphBin in terms of identifying mis-binned contigs and binning of contigs discarded by existing binning tools. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time that the information from the assembly graph has been used in a tool for the binning of metagenomic contigs.
Availability and implementation

> The source code of GraphBin is available at [https://github.com/Vini2/GraphBin](https://github.com/Vini2/GraphBin){:target="_blank"}.

<hr/>

### GraphBin2
Presented at *WABI 2020*
DOI: [10.4230/LIPIcs.WABI.2020.8](https://doi.org/10.4230/LIPIcs.WABI.2020.8){:target="_blank"}

**Abstract**

Metagenomic sequencing allows us to study structure, diversity and ecology in microbial communities without the necessity of obtaining pure cultures. In many metagenomics studies, the reads obtained from metagenomics sequencing are first assembled into longer contigs and these contigs are then binned into clusters of contigs where contigs in a cluster are expected to come from the same species. As different species may share common sequences in their genomes, one assembled contig may belong to multiple species. However, existing tools for contig binning only support non-overlapped binning, i.e., each contig is assigned to at most one bin (species). In this paper, we introduce GraphBin2 which refines the binning results obtained from existing tools and, more importantly, is able to assign contigs to multiple bins. GraphBin2 uses the connectivity and coverage information from assembly graphs to adjust existing binning results on contigs and to infer contigs shared by multiple species. Experimental results on both simulated and real datasets demonstrate that GraphBin2 not only improves binning results of existing tools but also supports to assign contigs to multiple bins.

> Our program can be found at [https://github.com/Vini2/GraphBin2](https://github.com/Vini2/GraphBin2){:target="_blank"}.


<hr/>